1. Title slide

2. Contents

3. Why I got into brewing

4. Brewing process

  - Very few ingredients to make beer, as stella and the germans are at pains to make clear. Malted barley, hops, yeast and water make up most of the beer out there, with with occasional bonkers ingredients like wheat, fruit, more hops, coriander, coffee, coconut etc added in for speciality offerings.

  - 3 stage process.
    1. Mash: the malted barley is steeped in water and held at an exact temperature for an hour to 75 minutes. This extracts starches and various flavour compounds from the grain by activating enzymes, which break down long-chain sugars into shorter ones. Temp is very important here, which I'll explore later in the talk.
  - The 'wort' is run off through a filter into another container, and a second much hotter batch of water is pumped onto the grist. This is called the 'sparge', and it is effectively a means of 'rinsing' the last of the sugars from the grist, and halting enzymatic activity by denaturing the enzymes.

    2. Boil: The second broad stage of the process is the boil. Once the wort from the mash and sparge have been run off, it is boiled for an hour. At the beginning, middle and endof the boil, hops are added, with the early hops affecting the flavour of the beer, and the late hops imparting aromas.

    3. Fermentation: Once the hour is up, the beer is crash cooled, and run off into a sanitized fermenter. Yeast is added, and the wort is left to ferment for a week or so. During this stage, yeast consumes sugars in the wort, and produces alcohol and CO2 (which is vented off through an airlock). At the end of the week (ish), you're left with flat, 'green' beer. It's racked off into a secondary vessel and mixed with a little more sugar, and then distributed into bottles or kegs and sealed. As before, the yeast gets to work on the sugar, but this time the CO2 cannot escape, and so carbonates the beer. Let it condition for a week in the warm, and a couple of weeks in the cold, and then it's good for drinking!

5. How to change the outcome

So this is the basic beermaking process, and to be honest you can make most beers without a lot more fuss than that. However, there are several points along the way that you can tweak the process in order to dramatically change the end product, such as:

  - Mash temperature: Different yeast strains are capable of consuming particular sugar chain lengths, and won't bother with longer chains than this - these are known as 'unfermentable dextrins'. If you recall, I mentioned that starches that are washed out of the grain during the mash are broken down by enzymes - there are different variants which match different lengths of sugar chain. The analogy that John Palmer uses for this process is that of trimming a hedge.

During the process of tidying a hedge, a range of tools must be used to fit the task at hand - so perhaps a hedge trimmer will work for the twigs and branch ends (beta amylase), but clippers might be more appropriate for the larger branches (alpha amylase). The enzymes work in an analogous way - a starch is essentially a group of sugars joined together, and beta amylase (our hedge trimmers) works from the 'twig' end sequentially. On a starch polymer, there are many of these ends exposed, and so beta amylase (much like our hedge trimmers) is able to break down the starch very rapidly. However, likely due to the molecule's shape and size, it cannot work indefinitely to the end of the starch, and will usually stop about 3 or 4 glucoses from the branch joint. Alpha amylase (our clippers) is more random in it's approach, and is instrumental in breaking large polymers into shorter ones, exposing more 'twig's for the beta amylase.

The reason this is important is because alpha and beta amylase have slightly different optimal temperatures - alpha works best between 67 and 70 degrees celcius, while beta is more comfortable between 57 and 65. Generally, mashes are conducted between these temperatures (66-67) as a compromise between the two, but changing this temperature will have a dramatic effect on the beer. A lower mash temperature (in the beta-amylase range) will result in a thinner bodied, crisp, dry beer, and a higher temp (in the range where beta-amylase is denatured) will produce a heavier, sweeter end product (due to the higher concentration of unfermentable sugars).

  - Dry Hopping


6. Equipment (general)


7. Our setup

8. Try them!
